

===== PAGE 1 =====
DEPARTMENT OF  ARCHAEOLOGY
GOVERNMENT OF TAMIL NADU
keeladi
 An Urban Settlement of Sangam Age 
on the banks of river Vaigai

===== PAGE 2 =====
First Edition  : 2019
Publication No. : 302
No. of  Copies : 500
Editors
Dr. R. Sivanantham
Deputy Director / Deputy Superintendent Archaeology (i/c),
Department of Archaeology, 
Government of Tamil Nadu
M. Seran, 
Faculty (Retired)
Department of Ancient History and Archaeology, 
University of Madras
Critically Edited
by
Prof. K. Rajan
Head of History Department
Central University, Pondicherry 
Published by:
©Department of  Archaeology
Government of  Tamil Nadu
Chennai – 600 008
Price : `.
Front Cover   : Pots In-situ in the trench 
Back Cover  : Exposed ringwell 
Book designed by  : Thiru Kathir Arumugam
Printed at: 
1st Print
#89 (50), General Patters Road (Opp. Sarmani), 
Chennai – 600 002, India.

===== PAGE 3 =====


===== PAGE 4 =====
 
 Preface 
1 Introduction              1
2 A Turning Point in the Cultural Historiography of Sangam Age      7
3 Keeladi - 2600 years old Culture        8
4 Trace of Agrarian Society and Cattle Rearing     10
5 Analysis of the Structural Remains       11
6 Structural Engineering         12
7 Graffiti and Symbols         13
8 Tamili  (Tamil – Brahmi)         14
9 High Literacy Level of the Sangam Age      15
10 Handicrafts           16
11 Weaving Industry          17
12 Life Style of Ancient People at Keeladi      18
13 Precious Ornaments         19
14 Gamesmen and Pastimes         20
15 Commerce            21
16 Terracotta Images          22
17 Summary            23
 Annexure – Interim Report        25
 Bibliography 
CONTENTS

===== PAGE 5 =====
Archaeology is an endless journey in search of our past. Archaeology as we have known 
always relies heavily on the tools left behind by our forefathers and the human progress 
is based on technological development. It is true that those tools were the basis for human 
existence and modern devices have evolved from these simple stone, wheel and other 
artefacts invented by our ancestors. Archaeological excavations are no longer a treasure 
hunt but a search for information and obviously means of answering specific questions. 
Archaeologists are responsible in classifying and interpreting the artefacts of ancient 
societies with the evolution of mankind. 
Archaeology requires the application of a wide range of skills, from discovery to 
interpretation of the findings. Exploring new ways of thinking about the past, gathering 
and maximising knowledge and adopting emerging technologies, will expand the knowledge 
base, improve interpretation of the past and capture everyone’ s interest and imagination.
In this endeavour, the Department has taken up a major initiative in adopting various 
technologies in Keeladi excavation like Unmanned Aerial Vehicle [UAV] Survey, 
Magnetometer Survey, Ground Penetrating Radar [GPR] Survey, etc to identify the ideal 
spot for carrying out the systematic archaeological explorations and excavations with the 
help of reputed institutions like Indian Institute of Geomagnetism, Navi  Mumbai, Institute 
of  Remote Sensing, Anna University and Department of Remote Sensing, Bharathidasan 
University.
Having recognised the significance of multi disciplinary analysis of archaeological 
findings, it has been decided to collaborate with reputed institutions operating in the fields 
such as Archaeo-botany, Molecular Biology, Population Genetics, Environmental 
Archaeology and Linguistic Archaeology.
There has been a renewed interest in Archaeology and Heritage in our State. Hence, 
there is a huge scope for the study of past, to discover, care for, promote and enjoy our 
rich and diverse heritage, contributing to our wellbeing and knowledge and conclusively 
position the history of  Tamil Nadu in the global context. 
PREFACE  
18.09.2019
Chennai
T. Udhayachandran, I.A.S.,
Principal Secretary and Commissioner
Department of  Archaeology
Government of Tamil Nadu

===== PAGE 6 =====
A
rchaeology as a discipline has developed into several dimensions 
and can be broadly divided into Pre-Historic Archaeology and 
Historical Archaeology. Due to recent developments in the study of  
Archaeology , the ecological changes have also been brought under 
consideration; separate focus is now given to the study of  Environmental 
Archaeology and Ethno Archaeology which deals with the study of  
living people and their material culture. Archaeology includes not only 
excavation but also study of  original source materials such as literature, 
epigraphs, coins and monuments. However, the role of  excavation plays 
a pre-eminent part in identifying such as Mesopotamia, Egypt, Maya 
and the civilizations of  the east like Chinese civilization were exposed 
mainly through excavations. In India, the excavations carried out in the 
respective sites uncovered the Palaeolithic, Neolithic, Chalcolithic and 
Iron Age settlements. Though the history of  Tamil Nadu can be traced 
from Pre-historic period with the discovery of  stone tools as accidental 
findings, it was those proper and systematic excavations in various sites 
by different agencies that lifted the curtain for understanding the past. 
When we talk about Archaeology , it is our duty to remember the great 
pioneers at this juncture, especially in the excavation area. The work 
done by both Foreign and Indian Archaeologists, who shaped the field 
are to be recorded and recognized. The father of  Indian Archaeology 
-Alexander Cunningham, Robert Bruce Foote, Lord Curzon, Sir John 
Marshall, Sir Mortimer Wheeler and other Indian scholars have done 
significant work in the field of  excavation. The Archaeological Survey 
INTRODUCTION
1

===== PAGE 7 =====
of  India as the central body regulates the various activities in the field 
of  Archaeology while at the State level, the State Governments 
Archaeology Departments, Universities and other private organizations 
carry out excavations in their respective domain. 
In Tamil Nadu, the Archaeological Survey of  India, Southern circle; 
State Department of  Archaeology; University of  Madras; Tamil 
University , Thanjavur; Sharma Centre for Heritage Education; Sir 
Chandra Sekharendra Saraswathi Viswa Maha vidyalaya (Deemed 
University) Enathur, Kancheepuram and Kerala University have 
undertaken excavations over the years and contributed significantly to 
the development of  Archaeology  in the State. 
 
The excavations are conducted at historically important sites, 
identified with the help of  Archaeological source through exploration 
by the Department. It has so far excavated 40 sites and unearthed various 
artefacts of  different periods. The excavations carried out at Parikulam, 
Tiruttangal, Mangudi, Modur, Kovalanpottal, Anamalai, Pallavamedu, 
Boluvampattu, Panayakulam, Kurumbanmedu, Kannanur, Tirukkovilur, 
Vasavasamudram, Poompuhar, Thondi, Korkai, Alagankulam and Perur 
are some of  the important sites dating back from Pre-historic to that 
of  Historic period. They have yielded excellent artefacts confirming the 
location of  the ancient capitals, trade centers, and their relationship 
between South India and North India and between Tamil Nadu and the 
Roman Empire. 
Vaigai River
The Vaigai river and its tributary Suruliyaru taking off  from Suruli hills 
winds its way along Sinnamanur and Madurai and flows eastwards 
through a number of  prosperous townships dating back to the middle 
ages like Tiruppuvanam, Rajagambhiram, Manamadurai, Partibanur, 
Paramakkudi and ultimately joins the sea, after feeding the big tanks of  
Rajasingamangalam and Ramanathapuram big tank, also supplied by it. 
The showers in the lines during the south-west monsoon and the heavier 
receipts during the north-east help raise two wet crops, besides plantains, 
betal in the plains and cardamom on the hill slopes. The Vaigai valley 
head-reach was the highway for the spices grown in the Western Ghats 
to be taken to the Townships  in the east. The work of  Paripadal, one 
among the eight anthologies of  Sangam corpus vividly describes the 
greatness of  this river as many as in eight long poems. The work of  
Maduraikanchi describes the grandeur of  Madurai city.
2

===== PAGE 8 =====
Early History of Madurai
Madurai is one of  the ancient cities in India that enjoyed continuity 
in the history from Pre-historic times. Due to its cultural prominence, 
Madurai is described as “The Athens of  South India”. It is also well 
known as a great centre for learning from very early times. As the seat 
of  the Tamil academy called the Sangam, it wielded great influence in 
the literary and cultural fields. During the glorious rule of  Pandyas, 
Madurai had overseas connections for both commercial and cultural 
activities. 
Some tools were collected by Robert Bruce Foote, on the left bank of  
the river Vaigai, immediately north of  Madurai city and also a single 
Palaeolithic tool from Aviyur, about 20kms south of  Madurai. The 
archaeological explorations revealed about ten sites belonging to the 
late stone age and Neolithic antiquities. About  60 sites with megalithic 
cultural materials have been identified in Madurai  district. 
The Pandyas and their capital city Madurai were well known to the 
Ancient Greeks and Romans. Megasthenese, the Greek ambassador of  
Seleukos Nicator at the court of  the Chandra Gupta Maurya (320 B.C.), 
in these accounts gave a vivid picture of  a South Indian Kingdoms. 
Strabo (C. 25. B.C.) stated that a Pandya king sent an embassy to the 
Roman Emperor Augustus. Pliny (C. 75 A.D.) mentioned about the 
Pandya, King Pandya and his capital Madura. Ptolemy (C. 130 A.D.) also 
referred Madurai as the royal city of  the Pandyas. 
The Arthasastra of  Kautilya, while describing the trade between 
Northern and Southern India, spoke about the pearls and muslins of  
the Pandya country. The astronomer Varahamihirar referred the Pandya 
kingdom in his Brhatsamhita. Kalidasa, the great Sanskrit poet and 
dramatist referred the Pandya kingdom as one of  the provinces visited 
by Raghu during his tour of  conquest. 
The earliest datable Ashoka’s rock edicts Nos. 2 and 13 mention the 
South Indian Kingdoms viz, Chola, Pandya, Satyaputra and Keralaputra. 
The contemporary lithic records found at some villages around Madurai 
(Tamil Brahmi inscriptions) bear references to Madurai city as well as 
Pandya kings. 
INTRODUCTION
3

===== PAGE 9 =====
Jainism in Madurai
It is stated that Jainism spread to South India by the migration of  
Jaina followers under the leadership of  saint Bhadrababu who settled 
at Sravana Belagola in Karnataka. Madurai and its surroundings were 
very suitable for the jains for their secluded life and practices. They 
selected natural rock shelters for their stay around Madurai. Atleast 
fourteen such centers around Madurai were located in which polished 
rock beds were carved. All these rock caverns have early Tamil (Tamil-
Brahmi) inscriptions which may be dated to 500 B.C. to 300 A.D. The 
earliest among them is at Mankulam village which have five natural 
caves and six inscriptions. 
Archaeological Explorations
It was Dr. K.V . Raman, then at Southern Circle, Archaeological Survey 
of  India in late 1950’s undertook systematic village to village survey in 
Madurai, Tirumangalam, Melur and Periyakulam taluks and reported 
number of  archaeological sites and remains. In 2006 Dr. K. Rajan and 
his students reported good number of  sites along the Vaigai valley 
particularly in its upper reaches subsequent to the discovery of  inscribed 
hero stones datable to early centuries of  Common era at Thathappatti 
in Dindigul district and Pulimankombai in Theni district
During the course of  exploration by Archaeological Survey of  India, 
about 293 sites all along the Vaigai river valley with various forms of  
antiquarian remains such as urn burials, menhirs, inscriptions, sculptures, 
hero - stones, habitation mounds etc have been identified and documented. 
This includes both fresh discoveries and re - visitation of  the earlier 
reported sites which revealed new findings hitherto unreported earlier. 
Archaeological Excavations
During the pre - independence era by Alexander Rea had conducted 
excavation at the urn burial sites of  Paravai and Anuppanadi at Madurai 
hamlet. Later Archaeological Survey of  India made the initiative to 
understand the archaeological potentiality of  this region through 
systematic excavation at T. Kallupatti in the year 1976. The State 
Archaeology Department conducted excavations at Kovalanpottal (1979-
1980), Alagankulam – (1986-1987, 1990-1991, 1992-1993, 1994-1995, 
1996-1997, 1997-1998, 2014-2015, 2016-2017) and Mangulam in (2006-
2007). Among them the site of  Alagankulam located at the ending point 
of  river Vaigai with Bay of  Bengal has yielded remarkable evidences of  
early historic period and identified as a port city of  early Pandyas.
INTRODUCTION
4

===== PAGE 10 =====
Archaeological Excavations at Keeladi 
The site Keeladi with the cultural deposit mound extending over a 
vast area of  more than 110 acres, amidst the coconut groves, is located 
geographically between 9º 51.294’N northern latitude and 78º 11.696’E 
eastern longitude.
By road, it is 13 km East and South East of  Madurai, a Temple city 
of  Tamil Nadu. On the northern side of  this potential mound runs the 
river Vaigai of  2 kms. On the East, exists the village Manalur having 
its kanmaai (lake) on its northern side and there by forming the north 
eastern natural water source of  the site. Similarly the village Agaram 
is located on the south eastern side of  Keeladi archaeological mound. 
The western side of  the site is engulfed by Kondagai village. All this 
natural location of  adjoining places around this cultural mound provides 
a natural epithet for the settlement contemporary to the early historical 
phase of  Tamil history.
Previously in the year 2014-2015, 2015-2016, and 2016-17 excavation 
was conducted for three seasons by the Excavation Branch-Bangalore, 
Archaeological Survey of  India.  The fourth and fifth season of  
excavations were taken up by the Tamil Nadu State Department of  
Archaeology during 2017-2018 and 2018-2019. In continuation of  
exposing the hidden treasures and antique of  this site, the State 
Department of  Archaeology has been conducting large scale excavation 
at this site. The Systematic archaeological excavations of  the fifth seasons 
are still in progress.
Key Findings – Keeladi Excavation (2017-2018)
Excavation work, during the fourth season had yielded 5820 antiquities 
with enough cultural traits in the form of  structural activity (brick 
structures, terracotta ring wells, fallen roofing tiles with double holes 
and deeply finger pressed grooves to draw rain water).
Antiquities like few pieces of  golden ornaments, broken portions, 
copper objects, iron implements, terracotta gamesmen (chessman), hop 
scotches, ear ornaments, spindle whorls, figurines and portions besides 
beads of  terracotta, glass, semi-precious stones (agate, carnelian, crystal, 
etc.). Popular ceramic types like finer variety of  Black and Red ware, 
Black ware, Black Polished ware, Red ware, Rouletted ware, few pieces 
of  Arretines were also found.  
There are also enough numbers of  graffiti sherds of  both pre and 
post firing nature. A good number of  Tamil Brahmi sherds also have 
been unearthed.  All these finds clearly indicate the cultural richness of  
the ancient civilization of  the Tamils of  this region having its close 
proximity to the temple city Madurai. Hence it becomes essential to 
continue to probe such cultural hidden treasures of  Keeladi site in future 
and reveal the cultural wealth of  the ancient Tamil society.
INTRODUCTION
5

===== PAGE 11 =====
6

===== PAGE 12 =====
1
I
n order to reaffirm the antiquity of  Tamils in the World arena, the Tamil Nadu State 
Archaeology Department has placed the artefacts recovered from the Keeladi                      
excavation for regressive scientific analysis and for AMS [Accelerator Mass                                 
Spectrometry] dating. The results received from the reputed laboratories are placed 
before the team of  experts for their academic scrutiny.  The comments and  
suggestions of  the experts are consolidated and the same is being placed before the 
public for their understanding and appreciation.
a turning point in the 
cultural historiography 
of sangam Age
Keeladi Excavation Site - Aerial View
127

===== PAGE 13 =====
8
2
T
he six carbon samples collected by the Department of  Archaeology , Government 
of  Tamil Nadu, from the fourth season (2018) of  excavations at Keeladi were sent 
to Beta Analytic Lab, Florida, USA for AMS dating and the reports have been received.  
The dates of  all six samples fall between the 6th century BCE and 3rd century BCE. The 
sample collected at the depth of  353 cm goes back to end of  the 6th century BCE  and 
another at the depth of  200 cm goes back to early 3 rd century BCE. As there is a 
considerable deposit below the dated layer and also above the layers, the Keeladi  
cultural deposit could be safely dated between 6th century BCE and 1st century CE.
Keeladi 
2600 years old culture

===== PAGE 14 =====
14
3
After analyzing the AMS dates              
obtained from Keeladi excavations, 
Prof.K.Rajan, a noted archaeologist, 
felt that the recent excavations at   
Keeladi present strong evidence as well 
as clear answers to some of  the  
hitherto held hypotheses. It is  
generally believed that the Early 
Historic phase of  Tamil Nadu began 
with 3rd century BCE and the second 
urbanization did not occur in Tamil 
Nadu. In contrast to this, the occurrence 
of  large scale brick structures and 
associated artefacts of  high   
economic value unearthed at Keeladi 
suggest that the second urbanization 
too happened in  Tamil Nadu around 
6th  century BCE as happened in  
Gangetic plains. 
Likewise,  the date of  5 th century 
BCE is considered as the date of   
Tamili (Tamil-Brahmi) based on  
radiometric dates recovered from  
Kodumanal, Alagankulam and 
Porunthal excavations. But, the recent 
scientific dates obtained for Keeladi 
findings pushback the date to another 
century i.e. 6th century BCE.
The dates for the samples collected 
from Lower Palaeolithic phase of   
Attirampakkam go back to 15 lakh 
years and Middle Palaeolithic phase to 
3,85,000 years ago. These dates are 
obtained through Cosmogenic-  
Nuclide burial dating methods. In the 
same way , the Microlithic tools  
belongs to the following Microlithic/
Mesolithic phase were encountered in 
Tirunelveli area and also in Vaigai and 
Gundar river valleys. The   
Neolithic culture were mostly  
discovered in Northwestern part of  
Tamil Nadu, particularly in  
Dharmapuri, Krishnagiri,  
Tiruvannamalai and Vellore districts. 
The next cultural phase of  Iron Age 
has been dated to 2000 BCE based on the 
samples recovered from the megalithic 
monuments of  Mangadu and Thelunganur 
villages of  Salem region. The carbon samples 
collected from Adichchanallur urn burials go 
back to 8th century BCE.
Thus, the recent excavations and the 
scientific dates clearly suggest that the people 
were living in Tamil Nadu continuously for 
the past 15 lakhs years and the Keeladi 
excavation clearly ascertained that they 
attained the literacy or learnt the art of  
writing (Tamil-Brahmi) as early as 6 th 
century BCE during Early Historic period.
9

===== PAGE 15 =====
10
they were predominantly 
cattle raising people.
 The presence of   
antelope to the level of  
6.66% and wild boar 
(1.33%) suggests that 
they were hardly  
domesticated. The  
availability of  cut marks 
in some of  the animals 
like antelope, goat and 
wild boar suggest that 
they consumed both 
goat, boar and antelope.
Thus, the faunal   
remains recovered from 
the single season of  excavation and 
the subsequent limited analysis suggest 
that the people mainly depended on 
agriculture and  
cattle rearing. The 
future analysis of  
botanical samples 
such as pollen and 
phytolith may reveal 
or substantiate the 
present findings. 
The excavation is in  
progress; therefore, 
there is a good  
chance of  getting 
more number of  
samples. 
trace of agrarian 
society 
and 
cattle rearing
T
he report on the faunal 
remains submitted by 
Deccan College, Post Graduate 
and Research Institute, Pune 
provided broad picture on the 
subsistence pattern of  the  
Early Historic times. The total 
number of  animal skeletal  
fragments is of  70 samples. The 
analysis is made under the  
category of  large-sized animals 
and medium - sized animals due 
to the nature of  specimens  
recovered from the excavation. 
Further, the limited nature of  
the samples restricted our  
understanding on the nature of  
species. However, the species such as Cow/
Ox (Bos indicus), Buffalo (Bubalus bubalis),  
Sheep (Ovis aries), Goat (Capra hircus), Nilgai 
(Boselaphus tragocamelus),  
Blackbuck (Antilope  
cervicapra), Wild boar (Sus 
scrofa) and Peacock  
(Pavo   cristatus)  were  
identified. Among the 
species, the cattle pre-
dominates the scene with 
25%. 
If  we, put the ox, cow, 
buffalo and goat together 
it occupies almost 53%, 
there by indicating that 
 Bones of Bull with hump 
4

===== PAGE 16 =====
5
analysis of the 
structural remains
T
he samples like bricks, lime-mortar, roof-tiles and the binding materials of  
the ring well collected from the structural remains were sent to the Vellore 
Institute of  Technology for scientific material analysis. The analysis revealed 
that every specimen contained elements like silica, lime, ferrous, aluminum and 
magnesium. The detailed report also furnishes of  its constitution and nature. 
The bricks and roof-tiles contained more than 80% silica mixed with 7% of  lime 
while the lime plaster possessed 97% of  lime. In fact, the long survival of  these  
materials with considerable strength and quality is due to the quality of  material 
deployed in the construction activities. 
Exposed Brick Wall
11

===== PAGE 17 =====
12
6
structural engineering
T
wo seasons of  excavation conducted at 
Keeladi exposed limited structural  
activities.. During the second season, a 13 m 
long wall with 3 courses of  bricks was  
exposed. Bricks of  two sizes measuring 
38x23x6 cm and 38x26x6 cm respectively 
were used in the construction.
There is a negligible change in the breadth 
whereas the length and thickness were 
similar in size. The well-laid floors, made of  
fine clay , associated with side brick wall were  
exposed in some portions of  the excavated 
trench.    
The side walls were not raised up to the 
level of  roof. It seems, wooden poles were 
planted over which roof  was erected. There 
are post-holes at regular interval to suggest 
that these were meant for planting wooden 
Brick Walls
poles. Though we could not recover 
wooden poles due to its perishable  
nature, the occurrence of  iron nails 
give clues of  fastening the poles and  
rafters. Few quadrants of  the trenches 
met with roof  tiles suggestive of  the 
fall of  the roof. The roof-tiles  
contained finger grove impressions 
meant to drain water and double holes 
at the top to be tied with rafters similar 
roof  tiles were also recovered from 
Arokamedu . Such structural activities 
express the high standards of  living 
during the Sangam Age.
As the excavation is in progress, the 
future exposures of  the structures and 
their subsequent analysis may  
reveal further technology involved in 
the structural engineering skill of  the 
society.

===== PAGE 18 =====
13
7
A
mong the available scripts of  
India, the Indus script is   
considered to be the earliest one and 
were 4500 years old. One kind of  
scripts that survived between the  
disappearance of  Indus script and the 
emergence of  Brahmi script is called 
as graffiti marks by the scholars. These 
graffiti marks are the one evolved or 
transformed from Indus script and 
served as a precursor for the emergence 
of  Brahmi script. Therefore, these 
graffiti marks cannot be set aside as 
mere scratches. Like Indus script, these 
graffiti marks also could not be 
deciphered till date. 
These graffiti marks were found in 
Chalcolithic culture as well as in 
Megalithic culture, particularly on 
black-and-red ware. These graffiti 
marks were encountered both in Iron 
Age megalithic monuments and 
graffiti and symbols
Graffiti and Symbols found in the Black and Red Ware pot sherds
associated habitations.
 Earlier excavations at Adichchanallur, 
Korkai, Alagankulam, Kodumanal, Karur, 
Teriruveli, Uraiyur, Mangulam, Perur and all 
other excavated sites of  Early Historic Period 
yielded such type of  graffiti inscribed 
potsherds. Outside India, these marks were 
recovered from the sites such as  
Tissamaharama, Kantarodai, Manthai and 
Rithiyagama of  Srilanka. Of  the graffiti 
sherds collected from the sites of  the Indian 
sub-continent, more than 75% of  the symbols 
are traced from Tamil Nadu alone.
The symbols and graffiti are very much 
suggestive of  the symbolic and codified 
expressions and communication of  the 
megalithic and Iron Age people. In this 
context, the recovery of  1,001 graffiti sherds 
from Keeladi excavation recalls the 
preliminary writing expressions of  the Iron 
Age people.

===== PAGE 19 =====
14
kuvira³-āta[³] 
āta³ 
8
A
s far as Tamil Nadu is concerned, the 
large number inscribed potsherds 
available next to graffiti is of  the Tami¶i 
( Tamil-Brahmi) inscribed potsherds. The 
scholars called the Tami¶i (Tamil-Brahmi) 
script as Damili or ancient Tamil script. 
Majority of  Early Historic sites excavated so 
far met with Tami¶i (Tamil-Brahmi) inscribed 
potsherds and a few of  the sites yielded 
inscribed metal rings.
In Tamil Nadu, nearly 110 cave inscriptions 
were documented from 32 sites and these 
inscriptions were deciphered and well 
documented in the book by ‘ PADMASRI ’ 
Iravatham Mahadevan. At Keeladi, 56  
Tami¶i (Tamil-Brahmi) inscribed potsherds 
were recovered from the excavation conducted 
by the Tamil Nadu State Department of  
Archaeology alone. 
Some of  the inscribed sherds carry 
the personal names such as kuvira ³- 
atan and ā ta³ and a few sherds with 
incomplete personal names carrying 
one or two letters. In these sherds, the 
name āta³ is inscribed as āta³ . In the 
early phase of  Tami¶i (Tamil-Brahmi) 
there is a diacritical mark to differentiate 
the long vowel from short vowel. This 
feature is well explained in the book 
written by K.Rajan. This feature is 
observed in vowels. The availability of  
such features Early Writing   
System – A Journey from Graffiti to 
Brahmi in Keeladi inscribed potsherds 
clearly suggests that the Tami¶i (Tamil-
Brahmi) inscribed potsherds found at 
Keeladi are older in date.
Tami¶i[Tamil-Brahmi]

===== PAGE 20 =====
15
9
T
amil-Brahmi letters as part of  inscriptions are found engraved on the shoulder 
portions of  the earthen vessels. In general, these letters were inscribed when the 
pot is in leather condition or were inscribed /engraved after the pot became dry. The 
letters engraved in leather condition could be made only by the potters at the time of  
making pots. In the case of  Keeladi examples, they were all post-firing in nature and 
were engraved by the owners after purchasing the pots. The representation of  various 
styles of  writing also suggests this view. It clearly suggests that the high literacy  
level of  the contemporary society that survived in 6th century BCE
high Literacy level
of the sangam age
Tamil Brahmi Scripts engraved on Black-and-Red Ware and Red Ware pot sherds

===== PAGE 21 =====
16
I
n total, 17 pottery specimens were sent to 
the Earth Science Department of  Pisa 
University , Italy through Vellore Institute of  
Technology for mineral analysis. The samples 
were analyzed and the results confirmed that 
water container and cooking vessels shaped 
out of  locally available raw materials.
Interestingly , it is to be noted that two 
quadrants of  adjacent trenches below the 
depth of  4 m revealed heaps of  potteries of  
many cart loads. The occurrence of  such 
large quantity clearly suggests that there 
could have been a pottery making industry 
at this site.
The Spectroscopic analysis of  the  
Black-and-Red ware sherds of  Keeladi 
revealed that the reason for its black colour 
handicrafts
10
Deposits of Pot Sherds
Compressed Storage Vessel Black-and-Red Ware Large Bowl
is due to the use of  carbon material and 
for the existence of  red colour is due 
to use and presence of  hematite. The 
potters of  Keeladi were familiar with 
the technique and knew the art of  
raising the kiln temperature to 1100°c 
to produce the typical Black-and-Red 
ware pottery.
The results of  the samples sent to 
the Pisa University , Italy reveal that 
the earthen vessels produced by the 
Keeladi people of  Sangam Age had 
followed the same technique and  
materials right from 6 th century BCE 
to 2nd century BCE. The same report 
also states that few pottery samples of  
2nd century BCE do contain earth 
content similar to that of  other region 
thereby suggesting that they exchanged 
the goods between the neighbouring 
regions probably through traders, 
craftsmen and visitors.


===== PAGE 22 =====
17
R
ecovery of  10 spindle whorls, 20 sharply pin-pointed bone tip tools used for  
design creations, hanging stones of  the yarn, terracotta spheres, copper needle and 
earthen vessels to hold liquid clearly attest the various stages of  weaving industry from 
spinning, yarning, looming and weaving, later for dyeing. The archaeological findings 
of  the Excavation Wing of  Archaeological Survey of  India at this site also confirmed 
existence of  the dyeing industry. So, the occurrence of  recent antiquities also attests 
the existence of  weaving industry.
weaving industry
11
Spindle Whorls
Bone Points

===== PAGE 23 =====
18
T
o understand the life style of  the Sangam Age society , an approach of  reconstructing 
the history of  the land based on the primary sources like epigraphy , numismatics, 
foreigners´ notices, literary works and artefacts become very important.
life Style of ancient 
people at Keeladi
The antiquities of Keeladi excavation really reflect the facts of the ancient life style of 
the society. In fact, agriculture seems to be its prime occupation being supplemented by 
iron industry, carpentry, pottery making and weaving. 12
Pestle and Mortar Ivory Comb  
Long narrow necked globular water pot Variety of beads

===== PAGE 24 =====
precious ornaments
T
he occurrence of  seven gold ornaments, copper articles, beads of  gems, more than 
4000 beads of  semiprecious stones, glass beads, shell bangles, ivory bangle pieces, 
comb and terracotta objects indicate the cultural richness and economic prosperity. 
13
Glass Beads
19

===== PAGE 25 =====
20
T
he occurrence 
of  artefacts such 
as dice,hop scotches 
and gamesmen, really  
reflects the pastime 
activities of  the 
ancient people.  
Majority of  the  
gamesmen recovered 
from excavations 
are of  terracotta. In 
this context, Keeladi 
yielded 600 hop  
scotches. Even now 
the same game is 
prevalent in Madurai 
and other regions  
known as Pandi  
or Nondivilayattu.  
Dices were also   
recovered from the 
site. The occurrence 
of  single and double 
holed terracotta discs 
represents that either 
they were used as 
wheel of  the toy cart 
or twist disc game 
pieces. Apart from 
these, 80 chessmen 
of  similar shape but 
in different sizes were 
collected from the 
excavation.
So, the existence 
of  these game objects 
posturizes the games 
and pastime activities 
of  not only of  the 
children, but also 
of  the elders of  the 
ancient society.
gamesmen and pastimes
14
Dice
Hop Scotches
Gamesmen

===== PAGE 26 =====
21
Agate amd Carnelian Beads
T
he lengthy coastal stretch of 
the state really becomes the 
causative and favourable factors for 
the Trans-oceanic contacts of  the 
Tamils with other parts of  the world. 
Moreover the favourable atmosphere 
of  anchoring the laden ships near the 
coastal towns also become supportive 
reason of  busy trade activities of 
the coastal towns. During the Age 
of  Sangam, the estuaries of  the river 
courses become popular as port towns 
carry out trade with other minor 
ports of  the Tamil country. At the 
confluence of  Palar, Cauvery , Vaigai 
and Tamiraparani rivers of  the East 
commerce
15
Rouletted ware (Indigenous)
Coast emerged with great port cities such as  
Vasavasamudram, Poompuhar, Alagankulam 
and Korkai respectively. Similarly on the 
western coast at the estuary of  river 
Periyar existed the Muziri-pattanam. Due to 
existence of  many port towns on the eastern 
and western coasts of  the erstwhile Tamil 
country might have promoted the commercial 
activities of  the ancient Tamils with the 
Occident and Oriental world particularly 
with South-East Asian countries, Sri Lanka, 
Egypt, Rome, Greece and China. The 
commodities like pearl, gemstone, textile, 
steel, pepper and perfumes were exported to 
other countries from Tamil Nadu. Similarly , 
gold, wines and horses were imported from 
the West. 

===== PAGE 27 =====
22
terracotta images
T
erracotta is the pioneering art specimens 
of  mankind. This art made up of  clay 
and burnt clay emerged first than that of 
stone, wood, ivory and metal. This craft 
doesn’t require much of  technology of 
specialized tools for shaping the contours. 
Just the fingers are enough for its creation. 
Pre-historic man shaped the stone tools with 
his hands. Later, to stamp his feelings in the 
form of  rock-art used the same. Thereafter, 
they attempted the art of  image making just 
Of  the terracotta objects recovered from Keeladi excavation, 13 are of  human  
images, 3 of  animals, more than 650 represent gamesmen and 35 are of  ear ornaments.  
Other than terracotta objects, the site also yielded jewellery pieces of  gold and copper. 
Objects of  iron were also recovered. But it is to be noted that this site didn’t yield 
any objects meant for worship so far.
 16
Terracotta Figurines
with the fingers. In due course, they 
learnt the technique of  kilning the clay 
images to the required temperature 
through experiences. In this regard, 
considerable numbers of  terracotta 
images were recovered from various 
excavated sites of  Tamil Nadu. They 
generally represent various forms of 
human and animal beings, besides 
gamesmen and children toy objects.  

===== PAGE 28 =====
23
T
he artefacts recovered from the  
Keeladi excavation forced us to  
re-examine or re-assess the hitherto 
held views or hypotheses.
Generally , the Age of  Sangam is  
considered between 3rd century BCE and 
3rd century CE. But, the available AMS 
dates obtained for the Keeladi carbon  
samples push the date of  Tamil-Brahmi 
to 6 th century BCE. These scientific 
dates forced us to re-assess the widely 
held date of  Sangam Age. The AMS 
dates obtained from Kodumanal 
and Porunthal pushed the date of   
Tamil-Brahmi to 5th century BCE. But, 
the Keeladi AMS dates further pushed the 
date to a century earlier i.e., 6th century 
BCE. This is one of  the important 
findings of  the Keeladi excavation.  
summary
17
Pottery Yard
As the high literacy level is well achieved in 
6th century BCE, naturally the beginning of   
historic period in Tamil Nadu goes back to  
6th century BCE. The available evidences  
clearly suggest that the Early Historic 
period of  Tamil Nadu begins in 6 th century 
BCE and the Iron Age begins in 2 nd  
millennium BCE. One should recall the  
recent AMS dates of  2000 BCE obtained for the  
samples collected from Iron Age megalithic 
graves of  Mangadu and Thelunganur in 
Salem region.
It is generally believed that second  
urbanization observed in Gangetic valley did 
not occur in Tamil Nadu. But, the Keeladi 
excavation clearly suggest that the second 
urbanization too happened in Tamil Nadu 
in 6th century BCE.

===== PAGE 29 =====
24

===== PAGE 30 =====
25

===== PAGE 31 =====
26
T
he site Keeladi with the cultural deposit 
mound extending over a vast area 
of  more than 100 acres,  amidst the palm 
grooves, is located geographically of  9º 
51’ 18.385” northern latitude and 78º 11’ 
45.132” eastern longitude.
By road, it is 13 km east and south east 
of  Madurai, a Temple city of  Tamil Nadu. 
On the northern side of  this potential 
mound runs the river Vaigai off  2kms. On 
the east, exists the village Manalur having 
its kanmaai (lake) on its northern side and 
there by forming the north eastern natural 
water source of  the site. Similarly the village 
Agaram is located on the south eastern side 
of  Keeladi archaeological mound. The 
western side of  the site is engulfed by 
Kondagai and its kanmaai. All these natural 
location of  adjoining places around this 
cultural mound provides a natural epithet 
for the settlement contemporary to the 
early historical phase of  Tamil history.
Previously excavation was conducted 
by Excavation Branch (Bangalore), 
Archaeological Survey of  India at the site 
in the year 2014-2015, 2015-2016, and 
2016-17. In continuation of  exposing 
the hidden treasures and antique of  
this site, the State Department of  
Archaeology has been conducting 
excavation at this site after getting 
approval from the CABA. 
Accordingly , the archaeological team 
of  the department comprising of  
the Director, Archaeological officers, 
Curators, Epigraphists, Technical 
Assistants, Draughtsman, etc., started 
the work initially of  laying out the 
exact location of  excavation. 
During the season totally 11 trenches 
were laid out, of  which 7 in locality 
1 and 4 in locality 2. Each trench is 
divided in to 4 quadrants in order to 
carry out the excavation work either 
vertically , horizontally , diagonally , in 
accordance with the orientation of  
any structural features. There is a 
balk of  1 meter width left between 
the trenches; 
introduction
location
ANNEXURE

===== PAGE 32 =====
27
trench No : 
A1, north east quadrant– 2
w
hile ½ a meter balk runs 
across the trenches vertically 
horizontally so as to divide the trench 
as 4 equal quadrants. 
The trench of  locality 1 were fixed 
on the east of  X axis and numbered 
as A1,A2,A3,A4,A5,A6,A7 While a 
single trench marked at east of  Y axis 
and numbered YP10,YP9,YP8,YP7. 
There is also a trench on X axis at the 
extreme south west of  the trenches 
and numbered as XA7.
Inauguration of  actual digging was 
done by the Director of  excavation Dr. 
R. Sivanantham of  the Department, 
with a team of  Archaeologists, trainee 
supervisors already trained in the 
field as scholars, to supervise the 
trenches for day to day recording of 
the excavation work. Precisely , the site 
observation of  the antiquities, ceramic tiles 
insitu the color, content and texture of  the 
unearthed deposit meant for examination 
was meticulously carried out. Initially , 
a labor force of  170 daily wage laborers 
were engaged for carrying out the slow and 
steady process of  conducting the scientific 
way of  excavation and proceed towards the 
respective cardinal direction of  the grid laid 
out for the season. 
In the course of  digging, some trenches 
revealed building activities, few with several 
disturbances of  dumps and pits. While the 
other trenches revealed the cultural deposit 
with clear cut stratigraphy and it becomes 
more appropriate to deal with the progress 
of  excavation of  the respective quadrants 
separately in detail. So, following is the 
summation of  the systematic observations 
noticed, recorded at the respective quadrant.  
Annexure
ANNEXURE

===== PAGE 33 =====
28
trench No : 
A1, north east quadrant – 2
T
he section of  the trenches revealed 4 
layers with humus on the top and the 
natural soil at the lower level. The 
stratification of  the deposit runs uniformly 
throughout the trenches from humus to 
layer 4 just above the natural soil all around 
and visibly recognized by color, content and 
texture distinct from each other. Humus 
comprised of  fibrous materials mixed with 
sandy clay deposit to the maximum thickness 
of  14cm. 
While layer -1 was highly compact due 
to clay content. The thickness of  this layer 
ranges from 30cm to 66cm. Few large sized 
brickbats were found embedded on the 
southwestern section, while smaller 
brickbats and potsherds were noticed 
on the other sections. 
Layer-2 also runs all around the 
trench and the content is loose with 
ashy powdery clay deposit. In fact the 
ring well emerged out of  this level in 
8 courses, probably cut out of  lower 
level of  layer-1 and upper level of 
layer-2 and the same continues till 
layer-4 was traced at the middle of  the 
trench adjacent to northern section. 
This layer contains more potsherds 
ANNEXURE

===== PAGE 34 =====
29
than the upper layer. The diameter 
and height of  ring well measured 93 
cm, 30 cm respectively and a thickness 
of  4 cm at the bottom. The minimum 
thickness of  this layer of  60cm was 
traced at northeastern quadrant, while 
the maximum thickness of  the layer 
noticed on the eastern section near the 
southeastern corner of  the quadrant. 
The ring well extended to a height of 
2.02 mts, the rings placed one over the 
other and found intact. The same gives 
an indication of  the water table at the 
higher level during the contemporary 
age. Adjacent the ring well, the clear 
cut mark of  the working pit on the 
southern as well as on the northern 
sections was observed. In situ the 
terracotta rings of  the well were found 
placed to the required level of  surface 
and the gap all around was probably 
filled with loose earth resemble to a 
dump like packing due to an admixture 
of  all the materials found from the 
upper to the lower level of  the well.          
 Layer -3 runs all around the trench 
with the thickness ranging from 92cm 
on the eastern section and reaches a 
maximum thickness of  1.66mts on 
the northern side adjacent to the ring 
well. The deposit was semi compact 
in nature with yellow tinge of  clay 
content, brickbats found embedded 
here and there besides potsherds. 
On the eastern section near the 
northeastern corner of  the quadrant 
a well perforated (bigger holed) broken 
vessel was also found embedded. The 
perforated vessel with large pores was 
uniformly made with equal distance. 
Each hole measured a diameter of  2cm 
and the space between them vertically 
horizontally measured 3cm.  The vessel 
is with a tapering bottom. 
It could be surmised that it could 
have been a jar to hold a night lamp 
with the mouth placed upside down 
and making the defused radiating light 
of  the lamp to glow in all the directions 
through the holes. This is like modern dim 
light lamps. In some cases such perforated 
vessels could have also been used for the 
purpose of  fermentation, wherein the inner 
side of  the perforation area will contain 
natural strains of  the fruits, commodities 
used for the extraction of  liquor which could 
to be scientifically tested and proved. 
There were also indications of  such 
perforated vessel used for filtration of 
drainage water and to maintain the natural 
water table without causing much pollution 
through filtration process done in 3 or 4 
stages with similar number of  jars kept one 
over the other containing river sand, coarser 
sand and smaller pebbles. It is an early 
concept of  water filtration and purification 
method. So to say , recent method of  rain 
water harvesting done at the concrete 
building of  the metro city recalls the glory of 
ancient filtration method of  the flash water.
Layer – 4 consists of  a compact yellowish 
brown deposit of  compact clay slightly mixed 
with sand. Its minimum thickness of  36cm 
was traced at the middle of  the western 
section. While the maximum thickness 88cm 
was noticed on the southern section. It was 
so clean all around with few brickbats and 
potsherds found at the lower side of  this 
layer. The western section revealed a post 
hole vertically of  length 40cm and the 
thickness varying from 8 to 14 cm from 
bottom to top containing comparatively 
loose material (sand) and the same gives an 
indication of  a roofing existed above being 
supported by wooden poles and planks. 
Just below this layer, is the dump material 
of  blackish deposit with enough potteries 
comparatively larger in quantity and its 
thickness varies from 36 cm on the east and 
south of  the southeast corner and 94 cm at 
the middle of  the western section. More 
over the deposit of  the layer contained 
more charred bone materials, and the same 
indicates dumping of  the residual, and throw 
away materials of  the kitchen.
ANNEXURE

===== PAGE 35 =====
30
trench no : A1/1
T
he stratigraphy of  the trench from 
humus to top level of  the layer-3 runs 
all around the trench without much 
disturbance. Here too, the humus with clay 
fiber content with a thickness ranging from 
3cm to 13cm on the western section exists. 
It contained mostly of  the modern glass 
bangle pieces and contemporary residual 
materials.
Layer – 1 with the minimum thickness 
of  20cm on the western section and 
maximum thickness of  58cm noticed on the 
eastern section. It consists of  compact clay 
deposit with few brickbats and sherds 
interspersed here and there on the section. 
But for them, the entire section runs so 
neatly except the middle portion of  the 
western section wherein the roots of  Neem 
tree standing adjacent to it to be so loose. 
This is followed by layer -2 underneath with 
some portions not dug out due to the 
required sloping level of  this layer at the 
east of  the revealed stratigraphy mostly of  
north and south western section. The 
thickness of  the layer varies from the 
minimum thickness of  66cm on the 
western section near the northwestern 
corner and the maximum at the center 
of  the western section measured 92cm. 
This was semi compact deposit found 
at the eastern quadrant of  the trench 
similar to the color and content also 
exists, except a pit like area found cut 
and dumped found at the northern 
section near the northeastern corner 
consisting of  more loose deposit with 
enough potteries of  bigger size, 
brickbats and stone rubbles.
On the southwestern center point 
of  the quadrant existed a terracotta 
oven with pinch design impressed all 
around externally. There is a hole at 
the center of  the rear thickness. One 
of  the unbroken facing edge side 
contains widen and elevated facade like 
projection. The hole is meant to leave 
ANNEXURE

===== PAGE 36 =====
31
enough ventilation along with the gaps 
between the raised projection knobs of  
the facade and rear.
The south eastern corner of  the 
trench revealed a separate course of  
fine clay deposit stretching to a length 
of  1.18mts on the eastern section and 
86cm on the southern section could 
probably due to dumping of  such 
material utilized for pot making. 
Similarly the same deposit was also 
traced on the northeastern quadrant 
of  the trench to a length of  3.5mts of  
the western section from south to 
north and extending towards east on 
the southern section to a length of  
1.18mts. The spread of  this fine clay 
found over layer-2 of  the trench gives 
an indication of  the raw material 
stored and used for making potteries. 
In this context large quantity of  
pottery collections noticed at the 
southwestern quadrant - 4 of  the 
trench very well confirms of  such 
ceramic activity. 
The terracotta oven found contemporary 
to a layer of  the deposit with the lower 
deposit with many carbonious and charcoal 
materials revealed the deposit to be of  much 
blackish brown in color gives an indication 
of  the kitchen area and hence the adjoining 
deposit got the stained color of  either black 
or blackish yellowish brown with loose earth. 
Two rubbing stones were also recovered from 
this level probably used for floor polishing or 
ramming the surface.
The oven measured 20cm on the extending 
arm side while the rear side length is 30 cm. 
The height of  the wall portion is 12cm at the 
non-knob area and 16cm at the knob area. 
The thickness of  the wall section is 2cm. The 
façade is of  wide, raised and volute at the top, 
while the rear central projecting knob is 
almost semicircular in shape. The space 
between these three knobs gives enough 
space for ventilation for the flames to 
uniformly spread heat of  the vessel during 
firing.
ANNEXURE

===== PAGE 37 =====
32
trench no : A3/2
T
he dig of 
the trench 
at a depth of  4.08 
mts revealed few 
larger portions of 
terracotta rings 
of  the well as 
continuation of 
over toped dump 
material. Further 
digging at the 
same level of  the 
trench started 
exposing the  
lower terracotta 
rings of  the  
well. As such the 
excavation was 
carried out in 
order to trace its 
lower most level 
of  erection. In 
total 5 terracotta 
rings of  the well 
noticed besides 
few large pieces 
of  the crumbled 
portions of  the 
upper rings.  
Each ring  
approximately 
measured 62cm 
in diameter and 
slanting height 
measured 32  
to 38cm with a 
thickness of  2 to 
3cm from its lower point to the top and 
the total height of  the ring well measured 
2.20 mts. It is quite interesting to observe 
that they have been perfectly erected 
within the sandy deposit seems to be 
the natural soil of  the area and more 
ANNEXURE

===== PAGE 38 =====
33
over the river sand considered as a 
good sign of  water table having its 
close proximity to river Vaigai on the 
north of  this cultural mound. 
In fact, the top portion was 
completely filled and packed with cart 
load of  ceramic tiles and to everyone’s 
surprise an almost full shape like 
Black and red ware vessel was found 
embedded. 
The clear cut marks vertically on 
the western end was suggestive of 
the dig at a later period and dumped 
with such huge amount of  discarded 
potsherds. Rest of  that level running 
correspondingly on the northwest, 
south and east was of  high compact 
yellowish gritty clay sterile deposit 
with few sherds and brickbats. The 
large pieces found over the lower rings 
in full shapes indicate the crumbled 
nature of  the upper rings of  the 
well probably crushed due to heavy 
loading and dumping of  the unwanted 
materials thrown in to the well due to 
its non-utility.
The trenches laid in locality-2 
namely YP10, YP9, YP8 and YP7 also 
runs in north south orientation and 
each of  them divided in to 4 quadrants, 
so as to facilitate the excavation 
work and trace the orientation 
of  any structural remains. In this 
context every trench was opened for 
archaeological examination and they 
unearth the vestiges with proper 
recording and documentation at various 
stage. Following is the narration of 
excavation work, trench wise with 
detailed description of  stratigraphy 
and deposit. The stratigraphy of  the 
deposit of  this quadrant A2/4 also 
revealed the same kind of  deposit as 
noticed in other trenches. But with 
slight variation at some portion of 
layer 1 from the surface the stratigraphy 
comprised of  humus, layers 1 to 6 found 
accumulated one over the other to a depth 
of  3.75 mts. The top most deposit namely 
the humus runs all around the trench with a 
minimum thickness of  12cm at a meter away 
north of  eastern section and maximum of 
32cm observed at the south eastern corner of 
the quadrant. This contains much of  fibrous 
material and at some point’s modern material 
like glass bangle pieces noticed.
Layer-1 succeeds immediately the humus 
at a lower level with a minimum thickness of 
21cm on the western section and the north 
western corner of  the quadrant of  the same 
section. It is compact in nature with reddish 
yellow brown color containing few potsherds 
and tiny pieces of  brickbats found noticed all 
around. In continuation of  this layer exists 
layer-2 with the thickness ranging from 8cm 
to 1.65 mts. This stratum is of  loose nature, 
comparatively ashy in color with powdery 
deposit contain more quantity of  potsherds 
and few brickbats. 
Layer-3 also running uniformly throughout 
with a minimum thickness of  4cm noticed at 
the middle of  the western section and the 
maximum deposit of  1 meter recognized 
as the continuation of  this stratum on the 
eastern section near the north eastern corner 
of  the quadrant.
Layer-4 was somewhat complex of  the 
existence due to semi compact deposit 
found in between the center of  the layer 
stretching from major portion of  northern, 
eastern, southern and some portion of 
western sections. In fact it contains more of 
loose earth with much ashy and carbonious 
material found mixed with enough quantity 
of  potsherds and brickbats. And immediately 
succeeding this deposit of  the layer continued 
the highly compact clay sterile deposit 
reached at a depth of  4.30mts from humus. 
The natural soil emerged at this depth 
continues further below with river sand.
ANNEXURE

===== PAGE 39 =====
34
trench no : A3/2
T
his quadrant also revealed 5 layers 
below the humus deposit running all 
around with much disturbance at the lower 
level particularly on the western, northern 
and eastern sections as noticed in other 
trenches with the same kind of  content and 
texture. Its minimum thickness of  14cm 
was observed on the southern section at the 
southeastern corner while the maximum 
thickness of  32cm traced near the 
northwestern corner of  the southern 
section. Immediately layer-1 succeeded with 
compact reddish brown clay deposit with 
its minimum thickness of  38cm at north 
eastern corner of  the quadrant and the 
maximum thickness of  68cm noticed on the 
western section near the southwest corner 
of  the quadrant. Few brickbats and a thin 
course of  loose sandy clay at the top of  the 
layer running on the southern end portion 
of  western section said to be of  varied 
content of  this compact layer.
Layer-2 runs immediately just below all 
around with loose ashy powdery deposit 
containing sherds and tiny pieces of 
brickbats. Its minimum thickness of  56cm 
was observed on the southern section near 
the southwest corner and the maximum 
thickness of  92cm noticed at the middle of 
northern section. At some point the content 
seems to be powdery due to tiny shreds of 
pottery.
Layer-3 revealed its minimum thickness 
of  13cm on the western section near the 
southwestern corner of  the quadrant while 
the middle of  the southern section exposed 
the maximum thickness of  75cm.The color 
of  the soil yellowish brown mixed was with 
enough of  potsherds and few brickbats, roof 
tiles, amidst few bones noticed here and 
there. In fact the lower portion of  this layer 
particularly on the west, north, and eastern 
sections constitute the heavy dumped 
material related to the filling material of  the 
discarded well located at a depth of  1.74mts 
found accumulated over the collapsed ring 
well with 5 lower terracotta rings of 
the well found intact.
The next layer named as Layer-5 
was typically a sterile deposit highly 
compact of  yellowish brown clay 
content. Its maximum thickness 
noticed measured 1.55meters. The 
minimum thickness of  this sterile 
deposit was 66cm at southwestern 
corner of  the quadrant. Partly broken 
globular spouted vessel placed with its 
mouth at the lower level was traced 
near southeastern corner of  the 
quadrant pertained to Layer-2. Another 
small vessel namely a shallow bowl 
with highly good neck and out turned 
rim of  red slipped ware almost in full 
shape was found embedded at the lower 
level depth of  5 courses of  terracotta 
rings. 
ANNEXURE

===== PAGE 40 =====
35
ANNEXURE
trench no : 
YP8/3 and YP7/2
T
he excavation at both the trenches reached a depth of  1.80 mts which marked the 
stage of  two courses of  brick structure noticed at the quadrant YP7/3. As the 
quadrant YP8/3 did not reveal the continuation of  the brick structure running south 
west to north east of  the other trench found by removing the balk portion in between 
the trenches.

===== PAGE 41 =====
36
trench no : YP7/ 2 
S
ystematically the work at YP7 /2 was 
continued at the north eastern quadrant. 
During the dig a small pellet like copper 
coin with much encrustation was recovered 
at 35cm. More over few broken portions of  
a copper bowl (miniature) with curvilinear 
surface recovered. Examination of  the same 
is properly conducted. Much antique 
remains of  the deposit could be adjudged 
by means of  extending dig at this quarter. 
The trace of  the orientation of  the brick 
structure was noticed at north of  this 
quadrant. In this context further digging is 
advocated to pertinently search. The 
deposit was meticulously examined for 
recovery of  significant antiquities 
along with associated ceramic types 
contemporary to stratified deposit.  
This quadrant was not disturbed 
except the penetration of  roots of  the 
bushy thorny plants. During the 
course of  the dig, partly broken pieces 
of  hop-scotches were recovered. One 
piece with finely ground of  the edges 
and inner of  the side smoothened 
found while the other side was perfectly 
flat. 
ANNEXURE


===== PAGE 42 =====
37
trench No : YP 7/2 & YP 8/2
T
he Excavation at both the 
Trenches reached a depth of  1.30 
mts and which was the stage of  two 
courses of  brick structure noticed at 
the YP7/2. The Quadrant YP8/3 did 
not reveal the continuation of  the brick 
structure running south west to north 
east of  the other trenches found 
entering the balk portion between 
them
The Quadrant YP8/3 just reached 
the level exhibiting large brick bats 
found embedded on the southern 
section of  the trench. So, with an 
intention of  tracing the alignment 
of  the brick structure found at 
the Quadrant YP7/2, a 1 m balk 
between the trenches was attempted 
of  its removal by the slow steady and 
systematic process of  digging. During 
the process of  the excavation at balk, 
same color, content and texture of  the 
respective stratified deposit observed.
Further digging at the lower level 
till the top of  the brick structure was 
carried out. Whence, the continuation 
of  the brick course at a higher level 
was identified and as a result careful 
exposition was under taken. In this 
context a systematic slow scraping was 
carried out, so as to identify the lower 
courses of  bricks and accordingly the 
earlier course already traced continued 
underneath and the same continued till the 
middle of  the eastern section. As surmised 
earlier, the brick structure continued its 
orientation diagonally towards the north 
east from the middle of  the trench with same 
kind and size of  bricks were utilized for its 
construction. The western side of  the balk 
from the middle portion was also excavated 
in order to find the other end of  the brick 
wall. Almost all this bricks of  same size were 
found in few pieces of  the other quadrant.
It is quite interesting to observe the offset 
projection of  the bricks of  the structure 
uniformly continued. Such a type of  offset 
projection is mainly to with stand the over 
load. There is also a post hole noticed on the 
northern side completely with loose sandy 
deposit. Similarly there is another posthole 
on the southern side of  the wall jutting 
into the eastern section. So the existence 
of  post holes gives clear-cut provision of 
roofing supported by poles over and along 
the brick walls. Adjacent to the same level of 
the brick structure on the northern side was 
noticed a thick layer made of  mud flooring 
of  well levigated clay. Similar flooring was 
also noticed in YP8/4 quadrant at the same 
level. The existence of  such well levigated 
compact flooring indicates the platform of 
the living quarter probably well within the 
four walls of  the structure so that it could 
be protected from the wrath of  rain and 
sun light.
ANNEXURE


===== PAGE 43 =====
38
trench No : YP8/1 (Floor)
A
t a depth of  1.50mts a spread of  highly rammed Clay floor was noticed on the 
eastern half  of  the trench. The western half  slightly at the lower level revealed 
the same type of  flooring. The texture was so hard and compact indicates clear pavement 
of  Clay flooring probably of  fine clay mixed with herbal extract and lime in the ratio 
3:2:1. As a result, the surface revealed ashy mass green color. This resembles and recalls 
the mud flooring of  almost of  recent past. So the habitation area gets extended in 
similar fashion for a different purpose. This is hard due to rubbles and brickbats found 
spread near the middle of  the southern section.
ANNEXURE


===== PAGE 44 =====
39
trench No : YP8/3 
T
he excavation work at this trench was 
carried throughout. In order to probe 
the continuity of  the cultural structure, 
this trench was opened of  tracing the 
extension of  brick structure found at 
YP7/2.  
trench No : YP10/4 
T
he holding portion of  a pot contains six 
radiating traces of  parallel lines. Each 
radiation contains 14 small parallel lines 
probably of  painting decoration. This gives an 
indication of  the painted design as a glorified / 
magnified Sun symbol. This is quite interesting 
to recognize that such a clubbed form of  the 
Sun symbol as a developed version with circular 
spacing of  the centre and the spokes found all 
around with different strokes.
trench No : ZB5/2 
A
t a depth of  2.40 mts very close to 
the north western corner of  the 
trench, a rim portion of  a larger bowl 
of  Black and Red ware was noticed. As 
a result much care was taken to expose 
the same without causing much 
damage. This large bowl had slight 
cracks at some portion.  To everyone’s 
surprise this seems to be the unique 
large single specimen of  the bowl so far 
excavated from the state of  Tamil Nadu. The 
rim is inturned with blunt beaked shape 
having the grove at the outer level just below 
3 cm of  the rim tip.
This vessel measures 62 cm in diameter. 
The shape seems to be round with slight 
portion found hidden in the western section. 
The thickness of  the rim is 2 cm and that of  
ANNEXURE

===== PAGE 45 =====
40
the body is just a centimeter with typical 
nature of  finer variety of  Black and Red 
ware. This recalls the refined color, fabric and 
luster on either side of  the vessel. To the best 
of  knowledge this is a rare sized Black and 
Red ware larger bowl. With an intension of  
retaining its location in situ to the trench 
further digging was temporarily stopped The 
contemporary yellowish patch probably 
comprising of  fine river sand deposit running 
all around the trench gave a different 
indication from the lower.
 In this context the top deposit was 
observed at the above level of  the vessel with 
much lime mixed context needs to be critically 
related as for the utility of  vessel is concerned 
with the lower deposit at the adjoining 
portions of  the vessel. This deposit is 
also found running uniformly all 
around the trench with much semi 
compact blackish deposit. As far the 
stratigraphy is concerned, this level 
slightly recedes from north-south 
towards the south. Further dig revealed 
cluster of  potsherds found emerging 
at the south western corner. The lower 
level of  the trench was excavated and 
examined to continue the work and 
reach the level of  natural soil. It is 
quite interesting to the observe the 
rope design on the shoulder level of  
the Black and Red ware vessel.
ANNEXURE

===== PAGE 46 =====
41
brick structure
A 
row of  the bricks paved with proper 
alignment running east west is found 
traced from this Quadrant YP7/2 at a depth 
of  1.25 m found adjacent to the northern 
section. After giving a fine brushing, the 
successive course of  brick structure became 
clear. The structure extended towards the 
east and gave some indication that diagonally 
the continuation of  the structure would 
either be traced on the east or on the north 
diagonally. The size of  the bricks measured 
35/36cm length and 23/24 cm breadth. 
Further digging in the adjacent quarter 
without disturbing the structure would 
reveal either the lower courses of  bricks 
underneath as such the thickness of  the 
bricks could be measured.
The size of  bricks clearly indicates on 
par with the sizes of  the bricks of  the brick 
structure exposed by earlier excavation at 
the site. Hence, the structural activity of 
the site runs at selected points thorough out 
the mound and indicates the standardized 
level of  living. Moreover, this area in situ 
the other adjoining area seems to be the 
peak of  cultural mound. The excavation 
on the eastern and north eastern side will 
reveal more spots of  brick structural 
activity contemporary to the early 
phase of  the Christian era. On the 
upper level of  the brick alignment few 
brick pieces of  the ruined structure 
were found embedded.
Further dig at this quadrant revealed 
another course of  bricks just below 
with off-setting projection towards 
the south, with the bricks arranged 
breadth wise. Moreover they are of 
three fourth of  the size, retaining 
square shape of  bricks.
The upper course contained 4 bricks 
and the lower course with 7 square 
shaped broken bricks and the same 
found continued to the extreme end 
of  the north eastern section of  the 
trench. A refined treatment to the 
surface of  the brick course of  the 
brick structure really revealed the 
engineering technique of  early century 
builders. It is very much suggestive of 
the structural extension of  the same 
towards the north eastern direction 
at right angle.


===== PAGE 47 =====
42
silt floor
T
he excavation work of  the trench 
– YP7/1, is resumed for the day 
from the depth of  34cm. In the course 
of  the pick, the texture of  the deposit 
was semi-compact   on the northern 
side and comparatively loose on the 
southern side. The color of  the soil 
was dark-yellowish brown. After 
clearing the deposit, a course of  fine 
silt  like well levigated clay layer of  
flooring occurred on the southern 
section of  the trench to a width of  one 
and a half  feet from the southern section. 
This seems to be contemporary to such a 
layer traced at YP7/4 in the same depth. So 
the continuation of  such flooring existed at 
required area is suggestive of  specific purpose 
of  living of  this settlement. The flooring 
thickness measured around 6 cm and made 
of  fine levigated clay. Further dig at the 
adjacent area of  the floor level revealed non 
continuation of  the same. Hence, by means 
of  observation and recording, the next dig 
was applied so as to continue the excavation.


===== PAGE 48 =====
43
T
he Tami¶i (Tamil-Brahmi) scripts found engraved on the outer surface of  Black 
and Red-Ware with single horizontal line drawn along with six Tami¶i (Tamil-
Brahmi) letters namely ku, vi, ra, ³, ¡, ta. The reading could be related with sufficient 
letter ‘n’ (d;) so the letters read together with ‘n’ (d;) suffix may mean the name of  the 
person as ‘kuviran-ātan ’. The suffix letter in this is conjecturally added to become portion 
of  script and missing of  the broken sherd. The proper noun of  the Tami¶i (Tamil-
Brahmi) script is suggestive of  either the quality of  the individual as philanthropist 
similar to the nature of  rain.
ANNEXURE
Tami¶i [Tamil-Brahmi]

===== PAGE 49 =====
44
Carnelian Bead Carnelian Bead Crystal Bead
Glass BeadGlass BeadCrystal Bead
T
he collection of  beads from Keeladi excavation accounts to 2301, which include 
glass beads, paste beads, quartz beads, faience beads, agate bead, cornelian bead, 
terracotta beads. Glass and paste beads of  various colours. The shapes of  the beads 
are spherical, cylindrical, gooseberry , and barrel. A2/2 quadrant yielded much paste 
beads from the depth of  1.47 meter i.e. 120 beads and at another depth of  1.55 meter 
357 paste beads were recovered.
Terracotta BeadsSoapstone BeadsQuartz  Bead
beads
ANNEXURE

===== PAGE 50 =====
45
T
he flat portions of  the potsherds were generally ground of  the edges to bring 
round shape. Such gamesman is called as Hop Scotches (sillu). They were used 
by children as game pieces. Hop Scotches are collected from the entire quadrant. These 
are of  various sizes as well as of  different pot sherds like that of  black and red ware, 
coarse red ware and red were etc., Totally 235 hop scotches were collected from the 
current season of  excavation.
hopscotches
ANNEXURE

===== PAGE 51 =====
46
I
n the historic period gamesman were made out of  clay material. Two types of  
gamesman were observed in Keeladi excavation. These objects might be used to play 
the ancient games like chess. The present session of  the excavation work yielded 26 
numbers of  gamesmen. All are made of  burnt clay and mostly black colour.
gamesmen
ANNEXURE

===== PAGE 52 =====
47
I
ron nails were collected in considerable numbers and pieces of  knife portion were 
also recovered. They are fragmentary. During this season, more than 50 iron object 
portions were collected and they are mostly of  iron nails and iron knifes. Some of  
them are of  un-identified shapes and utility.
iron objects
ANNEXURE


===== PAGE 53 =====
48
M
ore than half  size of  a terracotta Ear ornament with a centrally depressed 
groove around the circumference on one side containing a Trident like pattern 
resembling the Tamil letter “La”(ழ) in a group of  three lines besides the minute pointed 
holes spread around the three leaves like trident motive along with the minute dot like 
design of  pre-firing nature.Two varieties of  ear ornaments were found in this season. 
They are of  terracotta. One of  the ear ornaments is  of  round shape with concave 
edge and looks like ear ornament of  coiled palmleaf. But the other ear ornaments 
though seem to be same but decorated with a central hole. Totally 14 ear ornaments 
were unearthed from the excavation.
ear Ornaments
ANNEXURE

===== PAGE 54 =====
49
S
pindle whorl is a circular object with a central hole used as a flying wheel of  a 
spindle. It is a disc shape made of  potsherd. Considering its light weight and small 
size, it is presumed that this could have been used for spinning thread out of  cotton. 
One spindle whorl was unearthed in quadrant A3/2 at a depth of  2.40 mts.
spindle whorl
ANNEXURE

===== PAGE 55 =====
50
E
xcavation at Keeladi, yielded 23 bangle pieces. The bangle pieces were made of  
shell and glass with varying sizes. They are thick and thin in cross section. One 
piece decorated in outer portion of  the shell bangle resembles two small lines going 
through all over the bangle.
bangle pieces
ANNEXURE

===== PAGE 56 =====
51
A 
human head mould was unearthed in the Keeladi excavation. The collected mould is 
a portion for making cast of  a human head in metal or any other material with the 
inner side of  the mould beautifully carved. The head decoration and elongated ear are 
having minute carvings. This mould is made of  levigated clay and well fired.
terracotta mould  
& figurines
Male Torso Relief Torso
Bull HeadMould of a HeadHorse Head
Head
ANNEXURE

===== PAGE 57 =====
52
T
he finding of  deer horns are common in all the excavations conducted in 
Tamilnadu. Especially Uraiyur, Thirukkampuliyur, Boluvampatti, Karur and 
Alagankulam have yielded good number of  deer horns. It is interesting to note the 
Sangam literature has thrown enough light on the trade of  valuable deer horns to 
foreign countries. Single piece of  deer horn is found at this excavation.
horns
ANNEXURE

===== PAGE 58 =====
53
ANNEXURE
findings
T
he excavation yielded enough cultural 
traits in the form of  structural activity 
(brick structures, terracotta ring wells, 
fallen roofing tiles with double holes and 
deeply finger pressed grooves to draw rain 
water), antiquities like few pieces of  golden 
ornaments, broken portions, copper objects, 
iron implements, terracotta gamesmen 
(chessman), hopscotches, ear ornaments 
spindle whorls, images portions besides 
beads of  terracotta, glass, paste, semi-
precious stones (agate, carnelian, crystal, 
etc.) popular ceramic types like finer variety 
of  Black and Red ware, Black ware, Polished 
ware, Red ware, Rouletted ware, few pieces 
of  Arretines.  There are also enough 
numbers of  graffiti sherds of  both pre and 
post firing nature. A good number of  
Brahmi shreds also unearthed. All these 
finds clearly indicates the cultural richness 
of  the ancient civilization of  the Tamils of  
this region having its close proximity to the 
temple city Madurai. As the cultural mound 
is so vast of  its area and as on date 
undisturbed and protected by the palm 
grooves, it becomes essential to probe such 
cultural hidden treasures of  Keeladi site for 
some seasons and reveal the cultural wealth 
of  the ancient society dating back to more 
than 2500 years before present.
rare finds
F
ew pieces of  gold ornament like a 
star pendant, a small bell pattern 
like pendant, a broken bit of  a small 
curved ring, a flake of  an un-identified 
gold ornament were found. This 
season’s work yielded a comparatively 
larger bowl of  a black and red ware 
which seems to be unique of  its size 
and considered it as a rare specimen 
from the excavations of  Tamil Nadu.
The ring well traced at the trench 
A3-quadrant-2 seems to be the lowest 
level of  terracotta rings so far found 
from this site. On the basis of  its size 
and shape, this ring well is off  lesser 
diameter 62 cm, slanting height of  odd 
and even numbers of  the rings are 34 
and 38 cm respectively and thickness 
4 cm and placed over the sandy 
materials of  the riverine sand deposit 
fetching palatable drinking water

===== PAGE 59 =====
54
ANNEXURE
T
he cuttings of  the current season of  the excavation revealed the cultural deposit 
of  2 distinct features of  sequence with middle deposit continuation at the top. 
Based on the ceramics, tiles and minor antiquities, the chronology of  the site could be 
of  3 stages and they are Period-I, II and III.
Period - I 
Represented by finer variety of  Black and Red ware, black ware, and associated red 
slipped ware of  finer verity and of  polish. Structural remains like terracotta ring wells, 
brick structure constitute the building activity of  the phase. 
Period – II 
Similar ceramic types as the lower level but of  medium fabric and fineness, roof  tile, 
with grooved depressions and most probably double holed besides antiquities like 
terracotta ear ornaments, gamesmen of  terracotta of  bone tusk, apart  from bangle 
pieces of  conches, semiprecious stone beads along with beads of  paste belong to the 
this phase. Some numbers of  spindle whorls were also recovered from the trenches. 
Apart from this few metal objects of  copper (antimony rods, unidentified objects), 
copper coin, one in square shape with much corrosion, a silver punch marked coin 
having punch mark constitute the sequence of  cultural deposit of  this period. There 
were also ivory objects such as cubical dice like gamesmen, arrow points of  bone used 
for hunting animals, hop-scotches made of  terracotta and potsherds, iron objects like 
broken portions of  spear head etc., found.
Period – III
Ceramic tiles of  red slipped ware, red ware, glass beads from the upper level of  the 
deposit represent this period. So the chronology of  this site keeladi with three periods 
could be scientifically fixed between 6th century BCE and 11, 12th century CE. In this 
context, period-I represented the cultural settings of  the site from 6 century BCE to 
3rd century BCE. Period-II existed between 3rd century BCE and 4, 5th century CE,  
while the last phase, period-III consituted the finds belonging to date from 4, 5th 
century CE t0 11, 12th century CE. Hence period-I is the earliest  phase found at the 
lower level of  the deposit and consequently the other two over it.
cultural sequences 
and 
chronology

===== PAGE 60 =====
55
graffiti and symbols
ANNEXURE

===== PAGE 61 =====
56
tamil brahmi
ANNEXURE

===== PAGE 62 =====
57
decorative ware
ANNEXURE

===== PAGE 63 =====
58
similarities between graffiti 
symbols of Keeladi
and signs of Indus Civilization
ANNEXURE
indus sign-225
indus sign-307
indus sign-365
indus sign-318
indus sign-318
Keeladi graffiti INDUS sign

===== PAGE 64 =====
59
Excavation Director  -  Dr. R. Sivanantham, Deputy Director 
Excavation Co-Director -  Dr. J. Baskar, Archaeological Officer (i/c) 
Excavation Expert  -  Thiru M. Seran 
Archaeologists   -  Thiru J. Ranjith  
         Thiru M. Prabhakaran
         Thiru T. Thangadurai
         Thiru S. Nandakumar
                                                              Thiru K. Sakthivel
         Thiru B. Asaithambi
Surveyor    -   Thiru T. Thangavel, Executive Engineer
          Thiru K. Olimalik, Asst. Executive Engineer
Chemist    - Thiru P. Kaleeswaran, Chemist
        Thiru P . Senthilkumar, Assistant Chemist
On site Supporting   - Institute of  Epigraphy Students  
         (2017-2018 & 2018-2019)
         Thiru M. Muthukaruppu, Office Assistant
          Thiru P . Senthilkumar, Driver
Technical Assistance  - Thiru D. Prakash, Superintendent
Administrative  Supporting  -  Thiru V. Sivanandam, Assistant Director (H.Q)
Staff          Selvi R. Kavitha, Assistant Accounts Officer
         Tmt. D. Sridevi, Superintendent
          Tmt N. Nagarathinam, Superintendent
        Tmt. B. Mythili, Superintendent
         Thiru B. Nagesh, Assistant
          Tmt. G. Umavathy, Assistant
       Thiru S. Anbunambi, Cashier
Drawings prepared          - Thiru M. Ramesh, Research Assistant
Keeladi Excavation Team
Under the guidance of
 Thiru T. Udhayachandran, I.A.S,
Principal Secretary and Commissioner
 Department of Archaeology 
Dr. D. Jagannathan, I.A.S., 
 the then Commissioner [F AC].,
Department of Archaeology  
Excavation Team

===== PAGE 65 =====
60
ANNEXURE
Places of Excavations carried out by 
Department of Archaeology 
S. No 
Place District     Year of            
excavation Nature of Site 
1 Korkai Thoothukudi 1968-1969 Early Historic  
2 Panchalankurichi Thoothukudi 1968-1969 Modern  
3 Vasavasamudram Kancheepuram 1969-1970 Early Historic 
4 Anaimalai Coimbatore 1969-1970 Megalithic 
5 Pallavamedu Kancheepuram 1970-1971 Medieval  
6 Karur Karur 1973-1974 
1994-1995 
Early Historic  
7 Panayakulam Dharmapuri 1979-1980 Early Historic 
8 Boluvampatti Coimbatore 1979-1980 
1980-1981 
Medieval  
9 Kovalanpottal Madurai 1980-1981 Megalithic 
10 Thondi Ramanathapuram 1980-1981 Early Historic 
11 Gangaikondacholapuram Ariyalur 1980-1981 
1986-1987 
2008-2009 
Medieval  
12 Kannanur Tiruchirappalli 1982-1983 Medieval 
13 Kurumbanmedu Thanjavur 1984-1985 Medieval  
14 Palayarai Thanjavur 1984-1985 Medieval  
15 Alagankulam Ramanathapuram 1986-1987 
1990-1991 
1992-1993 
1994-1995 
1996-1997 
2014-2015 
2016-2017 
Early Historic  
16 Tirukkovilur Villupuram 1992-1993 Early Historic  
 
17 Kodumanal Erode 1992-1993 
1996-1997 
Megalithic & Historic 
18 Sendamangalam Villupuram 1992-1993 
1994-1995 
Medieval 
 
19 Padavedu Tiruvannamalai 1992-1993 Medieval 
20 Tiruttangal Virudhunagar 1994-1995 Microlithic 
21 Poompuhar Nagapattinam 1994-1995 
1997-1998 
Early Historic  
22 Maligaimedu Cuddalore 1999-2000 Early Historic  
23 Teriruveli Ramanathapuram 1999-2000 Early Historic 
24 Mangudi Tirunelveli 2001-2002 Microlithic 
25 Perur Coimbatore 2001-2002 Early Historic 
 
26 Andipatti Tiruvannamalai 2004-2005 Early Historic  
27 Modur Dharmapuri 2004-2005 Neolithic 
28 Marakkanam Villupuram 2005-2006 Medieval  
29 Parikulam Tiruvallur 2005-2007 Palaeolithic 
30 Nedunkur Karur 2006-2007 Megalithic 
31 Mangulam Madurai 2006-2007 Early Historic  
32 Sembiyankandiyur Nagapattinam 2007-2008 Megalithic 
33 Tarangambadi Nagapattinam 2008-2009 Modern  
34 Rajakkalmangalam Tirunelveli 2009-2010 Medieval 
35 Talaichankadu Nagapattinam 2010-2011 Medieval 
36 Alambarai Kancheepuram 2011-2012 Modern  
37 Srirangam Tiruchirappalli 2013-2014 
2014-2015 
Medieval  
38 Ukkiran Kottai Tirunelveli 2014-2015 Medieval 
39 Pattarai perumbudur Tiruvallur 2015-2016 
2017-2018 
Later Palaeolithic 
40 Keeladi Sivagangai 2017-2018 
2018-2019 
Early Historic 
 
Places of Excavations carried out by 
department of archaeology 

===== PAGE 66 =====
61
Wheeler, R.E.M., Ghosh, A., and Krishna Deva 1946   “ Arikamedu, An Indo-
Roman Trading Station on the East Coast of  India”, Ancient India, vol.2, Archaeological 
Survey of  India, New Delhi, pp.17-125. 
Begley, Vimala 1988  “Rouletted ware at Arikamedu: A New Approach”,  American 
Journal of  Archaeology, vol.92, no. 3, July , pp.427-440. 
Begley, Vimala 2004  “The Dating of  Arikamedu and its Bearing on the Archaeology 
of  Early Historical South India”, in Jean-Luc Chevillard (ed.), South-Indian Horizons: 
Felicitation Volume for Francois Gros,  Institut Francais de Pondichery and EFEO, 
Pondicherry , pp.513-537. 
Raman, K.V.  “Heritage in Clay”, in K.V.Raman, Temple Art, Icons and Culture of  
India and South-East Asia, Sharadha Publishing House, Delhi, 2006. Pp.90-92
Shanmugam, P.,  Terracotta Art in the Tamil country , Bulletin of  the  Chennai 
Government Museum, Vol.XV , no.8, 2007, Chennai,2007.
Subramanian, A., Terracotta Art in Tamilnadu”,  Annals of  Oriental Research, Silver 
Jubilee Volume, 1975, pp.140-144.
Rajan, Gurukkal, 1989 “Forms of  Production and Forces  of  Change in Ancient 
Tamil Society”,  Studies in History , Vol. 5 (2), pp.159-175.
Rajan, K., 1991d  “New Light on Graffiti Marks”,  Journal of  Marine Archaeology , 
vol.2 :47-54.
Rajan, K., 1995  “Traditional Bead  Making Industry in Tamil Nadu, a report 
submitted to the Nehru Trust, New Delhi.
Rajan, K., and Osmund Bopearachchi, 2002 “Graffiti Marks of  Kodumanal (India) 
and Ridiyagama (Sri Lanka) – A Comparative Study”,  Man and Environment, vol.27 
(2), pp.97-105.
Raman, K.V., 1976 “Brahmi Inscription of  Tamil Nadu: an historical assessment”,  
The Sri Lanka Journal of  South Asian Studies, vol.1(1), pp.64-75.
Subramanian, N., 1980 “Sangam Polity” – The Administration and Social life of  the 
Sangam Tamils, Ennes Publications, Madurai.
Gurumurthy, S., 1999 Deciphering the Indus Script: From Graffiti on Ancient Indian 
Pottery , University of  Madras, Madras.
bibliography